Dr. Bill Peters, who is the head of the Department
of Education Curriculum and Instruction and has
been at Texas A&M since 1981. And Dr. Peters, I hope
you're going to share with me a few of the changes
that have occurred since you have been here. And
again, you are one of my newer interviewees. But
maybe your perceptions of what has caused some of
these major changes. you know, how you feel about
where we're going. We'll go from the past to the
present to the future, if that's okay. And just
give me, first of all, changes within the college
and then, or if you want to, specifically just
within your department. As department head,
you're seeing, you know, the department and the
college from a totally different, because you
have interaction with the dean and it's, you know,
I'm kind of peeking in through little windows and
doors. I don't I'm not a part of the whole system or
the organization. Well, I came to Texas A&M
University from the University of Kentucky,
where I had chaired a similar department. And I was
at that institution for 13 years. And I served
under the leadership of George Denemark. And
George Denemark was a very well-known leader in
teacher education. And I felt very, very
fortunate. to move from the leadership of George
Gennemer to the leadership of Dean. How did Dean
find you? Or was it Dean Corrigan? Yes, Dean
Corrigan. This is rather an interesting story.
And I guess I could share it as an anecdote,
perhaps, as part of how this occurred. I was
completing my first term at the University of
Kentucky. And in October, as chair of the
Department of Curriculum and Instruction at
Kentucky, I received a notice, as I do from a number
of institutions, that there was an opening for
head of the Department of Curriculum and
Instruction at Texas A&M University. And
frankly, I was impressed just with the
announcement itself. It was very well written. It
had a statement about the community. It was on very
fine paper. It was the type of thing that's
different from the kind of announcement that
normally passes over one's desk. And I guess I
would say that I wasn't struck in terms of saying
this is something I'm going to apply for, but I was
rather struck by the advertisement and the fact
that it was a Texas A&M University, but an
institution about which I knew very little. And as
I normally do, I listed it on our bulletin board and
really gave not much further thought to it, except
that it was the year that I was entering into my
review. And now I'm, I guess I'm going to be getting
a little bit into my personality now, but I guess I
dismissed that announcement because what I did
not want to have perceived was any kind of
perception that I was thinking about going to
another institution as a way to sort of get a more
favorable review, shall we say. And I was very
happy at Kentucky. I began my career there as an
assistant professor and moved through the ranks.
In three years, I was an associate professor, and
then I became a full professor and so forth. And
working under George Denimart's leadership, I
was very, very happy. There were some rumors about
George thinking about retiring. And I guess there
were a couple of subconscious elements that were
functioning within me that perhaps made me
subconsciously think about a move, but not really
thinking about one. Well, I just dismissed it from
my mind, to be honest with you. In early spring, a
second announcement from Texas A&M University
crossed my desk because the search was reopened.
And I thought, well, this is curious. Apparently,
they have not found someone for that position. Who
was department head then? Or was it an interim?
David David was the interim department head.
Robert Schutz had had a heart attack. And David
David was serving as interim head.
I mentioned at dinner one evening, my children, my
son in particular, was still in high school. And I
mentioned this at the dinner table. to my wife, I
said, that's curious, I have another
announcement that passed my desk about Texas A&M
University, and no one really knew too much about
the university. And my son said, Dad, you know,
it's a warm climate, why don't you just go ahead and
apply for that job and see what would happen? Now,
at that time, I had, my review had been completed,
and I had received a favorable review and was
reappointed for another term as chair of the
department. That, of course, took away any
semblance of my attempt to use any leverage. I
still said, well, you know, I'm still happy. We
like Lexington. It's a pretty part of the country,
and so forth. And I dismissed it again. My daughter
was at the University of Virginia at that time. And
I can't exactly remember the date, but it was about
the first week in May, perhaps, when we needed to
get a U-Haul. to go to the University of Virginia to
pack up her things to bring her home for summer. The
deadline for applying for this position was
something like May 15. And this was either May 13 or
May 14. And as we were packing to leave, my son said,
dad, did you ever send that application in? And I
said, no, I didn't. But I have it all done. But I
said, I think the deadline is probably tomorrow or
the next day, so, and we're busy, we're trying to
move. And he said, look, why don't we nail it on the
way leaving for picking up Vicki? And I did. And he
said, it may be postmarked. And I said, because if
it isn't postmarked by the deadline, it can't be
considered. Well, we went on our journey to pick up
my daughter from the University of Virginia, and
Patrick came back. got back, I believe it was on
Monday, and I was returning to U-Haul, and came
back home, and my wife said, Bill, you have a call
from Texas. And I said, oh, certainly I have a call
from Texas. Well, it was Brian Cole. And Brian
called to see if indeed I was sincere about my
application. And I said, yes, I was sincere about
my application. That's why I forwarded it. And he
said, well, we would be interested in having you
come to visit with us on campus. I was in the midst of
recruiting for Kentucky at that time. And I also
had some other rather vital things that I had to get
done. So I explained to him that my the time I could
come to be rather limited, but I could come, I
couldn't arrive until like 11 o'clock on one
evening because of the flight arrangements, and
would be able to spend a day and a half or so, which
was the time they wanted. In the meantime, I, of
course, returned to my office, and I had a few
faculty members who came in to see me and said, Bill
Peters, what are you about? And I said, what do you
mean? Well, obviously, there had been some
telephone calls made from this institution to my,
at that time, home institution. And I said, well,
I'm just really going down to look. And I had
previous to this mentioned to Dean Denimer that I
had received this second notice, and I said I might
apply. And his comment to me was, Bill, you can go
and look, but don't you dare leave, which I felt
very good about. Of course, I had just had
favorable review and so forth. Well, I came down,
and everything just happened very rapidly. And I
accepted the position here. I could tell you
another little story, and I don't know if it should
go on tape or not. But I came down here for an
interview. And at that time, they were also
interviewing for reading positions. And Dr. Pat
Alexander was being interviewed here. And at
breakfast on the day I was being interviewed, she
was also at breakfast at another table. And I think
it may be David David who wanted to introduce me to
her. And of course, what David David did not know at
that time was that I was flying back to Kentucky and
would be picking up Pat at the airport in Lexington
because she was being interviewed for our reading
position at that institution. Isn't that funny?
And that's exactly what occurred. I interviewed
her and told her she must remember I'm
interviewing for the University of Kentucky. And
we both ended up here. Isn't that interesting?
Well, you have, is it the largest department in the
university? Yes, one of the largest. How many in
your staff? How many in the staff? I mean, how many,
like, people? over 2,000 students in the
department. And if you include those individuals
who are interested in certification outside of
the college, we run about 2,400 students. And our
faculty and staff total about 100 in the
department. So in fact, our department is really
larger than some colleges of education.
University of Oklahoma, for example, has
something like 38 full-time tenure track back. So
really, by the time you came here, a lot of the major
things had already occurred. Of course, they had
already made the transition to the new
administration. Yes, first year. So you have not
experienced any of the drastic, you are now
probably in the most, in the biggest upheaval type
changes, would you say? Yes, I guess I would. Let me
say that when I came here, the department probably
was half the size it is now. I think we had about
eleven or twelve hundred students. So what has
happened since I've been here is an enormous
increase in student enrollment in our
department. And what is that based on, or what is
that attributed to? Well, it's attributed to a
number of things. First, I think it's attributed
to the quality of our teacher preparation
program. Second, I think it's attributed to the
quality of the student population at Texas A&M
University.
Third, I think it's attributed to our growing
national reputation.
Tell me how we have gotten that growing national
reputation. What has really been the primary...
First is the fact that we have a man like Dean
Corrigan as dean of this college. And he has been a
respected educator prior to coming to Texas A&M
University. However, he has increased, I think,
his visibility nationally and internationally
because of his sincere professional interest in
education.
To put it another way,
Kim Corrigan is not the kind of individual who is
doing something to gain more stature for himself.
He does it out of the sincere interest for those who
are going to benefit by what he thinks he can
achieve. I think that makes quite a difference
because what he has to say is perceived as being
said to further and to make better the lives of our
young people. As opposed to furthering, he's
putting it better in his hand. He'd use a
colloquialism.
I think that the And this may get into some of the
other points that you might be raising a little
later on. Well, that's OK. They can be in it. Sure,
sure. No problem. Is the fact that what I'm very
pleased about in regard to our department is the
department's growing national reputation.
And I think that is due. Now, some people would look
upon this negatively as opposed to positively. I
need to share with you that my entire career has
been spent in major research institutions. And so
I come from that mentality. And I think you need to
have that context. So that when I came to Texas A&M
University, I came from that mentality, which
said that there is not a dichotomy between
outstanding teaching and outstanding research.
Because in teacher education, I don't see how you
can be on the cutting edge of teacher education
unless you're on the cutting edge of research, and
they support one another. They are not
contradictory. I think some of our best
instructors, and I could name a few if you wanted me
to, but as illustrative of this, I think some of our
best instructors are the best researchers. They
go hand in hand.
We were just talking earlier about Pat Alexander.
That's an interesting point. Pat Alexander now
has a Spencer Fellowship. And that is highly
competitive, and it's given by the National
Academy of Education at Harvard University. She
has a $25,000 grant. And the manner in which you get
that grant is by submitting a research proposal.
And it is reviewed by the National Academy. And you
gain that grant if they feel that your research is
going to truly make an impact on the field of
education. What is she researching? What is her
area? She's looking at domain-specific
cognition versus the subject-specific matter.
Ooh.
It's really metacognition is what she's getting
into. Okay. Metacognition. Now, you probably are
aware of the fact that she just was one of the
university-level recipients of the Outstanding
Teaching Award by the Association of Former
Students. Oh, yes, very definitely. That was
wonderful. So what I'm saying, I think, It's
illustrated by Pat. She is an outstanding teacher
and an outstanding researcher. Another
individual in our department, just not to be
sexist, John Denton. And John Denton is a very
demanding, as Pat is a very demanding instructor,
but a highly respected, sought-after instructor
who also is highly productive in research. The
point I'm making is that...
I know what you're... This is going to be on tape,
but I'm going to say it anyway.
I came here in August.
I already had to begin the promotion and tenure
review process in the department.
I brought with me a certain mentality of promotion
and tenure. And what I brought with me was the fact
that when one was going to be promoted and tenured,
what you did was to put together a dossier. And in
your dossier were examples of supporting your
teaching activities, your service activities,
and your research activities. You also included
reprints of your publications. In addition, the
department head sought letters of reference from
individuals who were respected in the nation and
outside the institution. So there were a few
people. Letters of reference? Letters of
reference for support. of promotion and tenure of
individuals. Based on these dossiers? Well,
based on a vitae. A vitae, OK. All right, all right.
You can't send the whole dossier. Right. Now, that
meant when I came here, when I had these names of
these individuals about whom I knew very little
because I was in the institution, I simply met with
them and shared, you know, now you'll get your
dossier together. And if you want to give me a
couple names of people you know, but I'm going to
select some individuals in the nation who are in
your field. secure letters of reference. Of
course, they sat there just as you are, smiling.
And of course, from my perception, I just assumed
that this was routine, when in fact it wasn't. It
had not been routine, which I guess would begin to
show a change that was occurring in the
institution, a part of which I was. I was part of
that change. But it was strictly departmental,
not At that point, it was departmental. And I
didn't realize that. So when I sent out my letters
of reference and they came back and so forth, when I
put together my letter from the department in
supporting it, I indicated these letters of
reference. Well, now at that time, all we had to do
was forward this letter from the department in
which we supported or did not support the
recommendation for promotion and or tenure. And I
went to the college and then went forward from the
college. No materials were required at that time
other than this letter, although I did support it
with these letters of reference. I don't know if
you are aware of the procedures we now follow, but
the procedures that we began to use in the
department are very similar to the promotion and
tenure procedures that now have been instituted
by the central administration so that all faculty
who are up for promotion and tenure must have a
dossier. It's not called for by the central
administration, but it's there, and it includes
many of the pieces of material that I just cited.
And that dossier is reviewed by the promotion and
tenure committee as well as by the department
head. It requires a minimum of three letters
outside at the university. And those three
letters must be from individuals who are at least
at the rank to which the person wants to be
promoted.
So that, I guess what I'm saying is that have I seen
change at this institution? I have seen a great
deal of change at this institution in regard to
where it has moved in terms of faculty review for
promotion and tenure. So then we could answer,
that would be an answer possibly to one of of your
contributions in number nine, because you
already came with that idea, and it sort of
evolved. Perhaps it had something to do with the
way it is now structured. I don't want to be so bold
as to say it was a contribution, but let me say that
one of the first things we did, which I'd be glad to
provide you if you'd like, is to put together an
annual evaluation document And that came out in
February of 82. Remember, I came here in August.
And in March of 82, we put a promotion and tenure
document together. Because one of the things that
I recognized when I came here is that there was
nothing in it. This is for the whole college, not
for them. You're still talking department. OK,
I'm sorry. You want me to talk to partners? Yes, but
I mean, I wondered how it might have influenced,
because again, I'm looking at the department and
how the external environment of the college and
then the external environment of the university.
So maybe how, if there's anything that fits all.
Since there was very little in writing, and one of
the things that I felt very strongly about is that
faculty, I believe we have to have expectations,
and those expectations need to be But at the same
time, it's clear that faculty have known what
those expectations are. Now, then it's a question
of knowing those expectations, have you met them?
And there was a faculty committee, a faculty
evaluation committee, that put together these
documents. I served as an ad hoc member of the
committee. But it is a faculty committee
document, both of those. And if you'd like copies
of those, I'd share them. I would, surely. And in
the sense of what you're saying, in retrospect, I
guess perhaps they were one of the earliest
documents in the college. Because Ernie Goetz and
the faculty advisory council about a year ago
began to interview department heads in regard to
what criteria do they have? Were they written
down? And this is all an outgrowth, I think, of the
Faculty Senate, which was formulated. And our
documents, as I indicated, were dated 1982. And I
think they're probably the earlier documents in
the count. And other departments have formulated
their documents. And does there continue, then,
to be total autonomy in that every department,
according to the department heads, criteria just
follows? In other words, everybody's doing their
own thing as far as this type of document? Within
the general guidelines of the college. See,
that's part of what has occurred. What the Parent
and Staff Advisory Council is trying to do and has
tried to do is to find out what each department is
doing. And if there are discrepancies, then they
want to be able to identify those so that there can
be a college review committee that will
understand where each of the departments is
coming from. So you really answered that question
that I had about teaching research and service,
you know, through what you just shared, because
that is the way, in your perception, and most
everybody else is feeling that, you know, there's
pressure to do research, but if you're doing
research, you know, you can't do justice to
teaching and vice versa. Absolutely. Now, it's
possible for a faculty member to have a modified
role responsibility.
In other words, in our document, when you review
our document, you'll see that a faculty member
could come in to talk to me and say, Bill, I really
need to do a lot of research in the coming year.
Could you reduce my instructional load by one
course? if we can see that we can cover our
staffing. And I'd say, yes, we can do that. Then the
role responsibility has shifted. And then your
evaluation at the end of the year would be based on
that modification of role. Now, if you were, let's
say you were a new assistant professor coming in to
me, and you said to me, you wanted to, if it's
possible, you'd like to really, you enjoy
teaching so much, you'd like to do teaching and
have your research component practically just
10%. But I would say to you is, well, let's think
that one over. Let's talk in terms of your
probationary period and what the expectations
might be. Now, do you think it would be wise, if we
went this route, do you think it would be wise for
you to do that at this point? What would be the
impact of that next year and the year after?
Because, from my point of view, it would be a
disservice to the individual Now,
because your department has grown so
tremendously, do you teach classes all the time?
So you always have taught? Always have. Okay. How
has it affected not only your work with students,
but do you get a feedback from your faculty as to
whether or not they're able? making great
numbers, or it's impeding their work with
students and giving them the attention. And do you
have a limit, for example, on how many committees
people can chair, or how many graduate students
they can advise in that kind of thing? Yes. We
instituted, through our graduate faculty, a set
of criteria in terms of the number of chairs that
you could have in regard to PhD, DD, the number So we
have put a limitation on that because that was
getting out of hand also. Let me share with you that
my role has
been tremendously pushed into a management role.
With the increases that we have had and the limited
resources, frankly, that we've received It has
been, my time has to be spent almost entirely in
managing resources. And frankly, I'm very
pleased with the manner in which we have been able
to function within this stroke pattern.
By managing resources, are you talking about
space and money, just everything? I'm talking
about staffing. I'm talking about space. I'm
talking about operating expenses, I'm talking
about travel, I'm talking about research. The
October 1986 issue of Teacher Education, you're
probably aware of this article. Productivity of
faculty in higher education institutions.
This is based on the number of articles produced,
now this is in teacher education, produced in
major teacher education journals. And number of
presentations made at teacher education
organizations like the Association of Teacher
Educations, the American Association of
Colleges for Teacher Education, the American
Educational Research Association. If you want to
look, look at where Texas A&M ranks. And what I'm
pleased with is that although obviously this
means a survey of all the college faculty, in
regard to teacher education, my faculty is
heavily involved in teacher education, as
opposed to...
I'm trying to think of an area. industrial
education or something like that. So that when it
comes to making presentations about how are you
preparing teachers, what are the best
strategies, instructional strategies, and so
forth, and research in those domains, I would say
that our faculty are in a large bulk of this group. I
think that's incredible. And now, is there much,
in your faculty, much collaboration with people
in other departments or within The department
with each other, there is? As much as you'd like, or
is there ever as much? Part of this is coming from
Dean's initial structure of the college in regard
to its inquiry groups. And I think you're aware of
the inquiry groups. And so I think one of the things
Dean has tried to do is to cut down the departmental
barriers to the degree possible. When I first came
here,
it was clear to me that we were highly
departmentalized. To put it another way, the
faculty was very much oriented toward its own
department. And I think there's been quite a
change in that regard. As department, obviously,
I have to try to get the greatest resources I can for
my department. had to struggle over these years
because of this enormous growth that we've
experienced. And I feel that Dean has been open to
all departments in regard to their needs. And
obviously, we all feel like we could get a little
bit more. But I think in terms of what we've gotten,
and some of this has been central administration,
like operating expenses, we simply haven't
received increases in operating expenses. And
that's something the central administration
basically deals with. So that's not something
that is unfair in the college, if you understand
what I'm saying. And that's why I feel very
strongly that we've done very well in managing
when we can have this kind of research
productivity. At the same time, we are still
serving our students. Now, that's becoming more
and more a problem. We just began
pre-registration, and I already have a number of
classes that are closed. Now, I have students sign
a little slip in the outer office and what class
they want and why they need it. Here I have an
example of one of the burdens of management that I
have had to assume. We do not...